Experiments blogpost (#3074)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/experiments.md

---

> title: What launching Experimentation taught us about running effective A/B tests

Reviewer: On title, I'm imagining something like this:

Introducing Experimentation (and what it taught us about running effective A/B tests)
Introducing Experimentation and x things we learnt about running effective A/B tests

Author: Makes sense.

Introducing Experimentation and 3 things we learnt about running effective A/B tests

Reviewer: Going to stick with your title

---

> PostHog started off with simple product analytics. You want some data analysed, so you ingest this data. PostHog then lets you visualise this, slice it over multiple axes, and helps you answer any product questions you have.

Reviewer: Agreed. As this is part of launch week, we should start with the thing we're launching.

> PostHog started off with simple product analytics. You want some data analysed, so you ingest this data. PostHog then lets you visualise this, slice it over multiple axes, and helps you answer any product questions you have.

Author: Agreed!

Then came feature flags, which allow you to toggle features on and off, change what users see live.

It was a no brainer then to take the next step and introduce Experimentation. Since you're already analysing your data in PostHog, and are feature flagging new features, why not give the capability to test significant changes as well?

We recently launched Experiments, and there's a ton we learned about running successful experiments. That's what this post is about.

> ## The Peeking Problem is poorly named

Author: definitely want to keep this, maybe as 4th, last point? Or as first as is.

> The strawman pop-sci version of the peeking problem goes something like: "You shouldn't look at experiment results while the experiment is running because that can lead to you ending experiments early, when the data is skewed in favour of one variant, thanks to random chance."

Author: Nope!

> The strawman pop-sci version of the peeking problem goes something like: "You shouldn't look at experiment results while the experiment is running because that can lead to you ending experiments early, when the data is skewed in favour of one variant, thanks to random chance."

Author: (I mean, good question, I decided to get rid of that section, its probs not for this post)

However, peeking isn't the problem. The problem is taking action too quickly after peeking.

We built this into our product: Peeking is fun, almost addicting, when you can see your experiment results changing in real time. It gives a sense of excitement, seeing your hypotheses being proven right or wrong. More importantly, it keeps you coming back to the experiment, tracking its progress.

To solve the Taking-action-without-enough-information problem, we made it clear in our UI when it was okay to end an experiment: When results become significant, or the pre-determined duration for peeking has passed.[^1] This changed the conversation from 'peeking early and ending experiment if results look good' to 'waiting for the green light to switch on', and led to an overall much better experience.

[^1]: If you're looking for how we calculate this, see the user guide (TK: link)

> ## The kind of experiment you run determines how much data you need

Author: perhaps delete section completely

2. Conversion experiments, which work on a relative percentage. These are the traditional popular kind of experiments. "Conversion rate for the sign up -> purchase flow"

Perhaps surprisingly, trend experiments need more data and time to reach significance, versus conversion experiments. The reasoning is a bit complicated, but reach out if you're interested, we'll write an appendix! The short version is: You need 2 dimensions for both, test and control variants to accurately judge experiment results. In conversion experiments, these are people who entered the funnel, and people who exited the funnel. But for trends, you only have one count, the number of people who did the event. The second dimension for trends is exposure: a proxy for how long the experiment has been running. Since this parameter is completely dependent on time, these experiments tend to take a bit longer to reach significance. 

(TK: well, all 4 params are dependent on time in a way, soooo.... this is a bit confusing)

> ## Choosing the right metric is hard

Author: the next 3 headings flow smooth AF into each other. Definitely want to keep these 3 together, but the 2 on top don't seem to fit as well. Hmm.

That's a model that keeps on giving, even when things change.

Let's say its now three months in the future, and you've done a design revamp. Horizontal bars are thinner now, while vertical bars are thicker. As a result, horizontal funnels fit in cleanly on screen, while vertical funnels don't.[^4]

You could run an experiment again to find if user preferences have changed, but if your model is right, interactions should start going down, and you can make the call to revert back to a horizontal layout.

[^4]: A bit contrived, but easier to keep this blogpost manageable without explaining the ins and outs of PostHog graphs :). Also, don't tell our designer, they'll scream if they hear of this design revamp.

All this is trying to say is experiment results don't stand the test of time, and reiterates the importance of extracting a useful model out of your experiment results.

## Control for control

5. Control groups? -> All experiments are relative.
  6. Selection bias

TK: I don't remember what this was supposed to be??

Multi armed bandits? -> No, skip.

> 8. Clinical trials are very different from website changes -->>> hmm condense this. What am I trying to say?

Author: Hmm, not sure I want to keep this, but can become decent companion to first point. Actually yes, I like that. Peeking, then nature of web products, then the 3 in flow.

---

> date: 2022-03-21

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2022-03-23
```

author: ["neil-kakkar"]
featuredImage: ../images/blog/experiments.jpeg
featuredImageType: full
categories: ["Product updates", "Launch week"]
---

We just launched our Experimentation suite, and there's a ton we learned about running successful experiments.

It was a no brainer product decision: Since you're already analysing your data in PostHog, and you're already using [Feature Flags](/product/feature-flags) to roll out new features, why not have the capability to test how well these features are doing?

Experiments allow you to choose a target metric, choose specific people to run this experiment on, and estimate how long this experiment would run for.

![PostHog - Experiment Creation](../images/blog/experimentation/experiment-creation.png)

Thanks to Feature Flags, you can then easily validate whether each variant looks good, launch your experiment, and wait for data to come in. Once data starts trickling in, we run a Bayesian analysis to give a probability for each variant being the best, a graph of how things are looking for each variant, and whether the results are significant or not.

![PostHog - Experiment Results](../images/blog/experimentation/experiment-results.png)

> Well, that's enough about how experiments work. If you're interested in the technical details, check out the [Experimentation user guide](/docs/user-guides/experimentation). For now, let's get into three interesting things we learned about running successful experiments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's a powerful tool for building great products, but that's enough about how Experimentation work for now. If you're interested in the technical details, check out the [Experimentation user guide](/docs/user-guides/experimentation).  

Instead, I'm going to share some of the secrets we've learned about running effective A/B tests so you can get the most out of this new feature.
```

---
date: 2022-03-23
title: What launching Experimentation taught us about running effective A/B tests
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author: ["neil-kakkar"]
featuredImage: ../images/blog/experiments.jpeg
featuredImageType: full

> categories: ["Product updates", "Launch week"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
categories: ["Product updates", "Launch week", "Guides"]
```

---
date: 2022-03-21
title: What launching Experimentation taught us about running effective A/B tests
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author: ["neil-kakkar"]
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png

> featuredImageType: full

Reviewer: ```suggestion
featuredImageType: full
categories: ["Product updates", "Launch week"]
```

---

We just launched our Experimentation suite, and there's a ton we learned about running successful experiments.

> It was a no brainer product decision: Since you're already analysing your data in PostHog, and you're already using feature flags to roll out new features, why not have the capability to test how well these features are doing?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was a no brainer product decision: Since you're already analysing your data in PostHog, and you're already using [Feature Flags](/product/feature-flags) to roll out new features, why not have the capability to test how well these features are doing?
```

Experiments allow you to choose a target metric, choose specific people to run this experiment on, and estimate how long this experiment would run for.

![PostHog - Experiment Creation](../images/blog/experimentation/experiment-creation.png)

> Thanks to feature flags, you can then easily validate whether each variant looks good, launch your experiment, and wait for data to come in. Once data starts trickling in, we run a Bayesian analysis to give a probability for each variant being the best, a graph of how things are looking for each variant, and whether the results are significant or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to Feature Flags, you can then easily validate whether each variant looks good, launch your experiment, and wait for data to come in. Once data starts trickling in, we run a Bayesian analysis to give a probability for each variant being the best, a graph of how things are looking for each variant, and whether the results are significant or not.
```

![PostHog - Experiment Results](../images/blog/experimentation/experiment-results.png)

> Well, that's enough about how experiments work. If you're interested in the technical details, check out the user guide. (TK: link) For now, let's get into three interesting things we learned about running successful experiments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Well, that's enough about how experiments work. If you're interested in the technical details, check out the [Experimentation user guide](/docs/user-guides/experimentation). For now, let's get into three interesting things we learned about running successful experiments.
```

> ## Choosing the right metric is hard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. Choose your metric carefully
```

Reviewer: Saying it's hard feels a bit reductive

Let's say you're running an experiment to optimise the number of times people interact with PostHog graphs. Specifically, you're testing out different layouts for funnels, horizontal and vertical, and want to find which one leads to more interactions.

Now, you can choose two metrics:

1. Number of interactions across all graphs, not just funnels.
2. Number of interactions for funnels.

Which one do you choose?

> Note that you're choosing the total interactions here, not unique interactions. Which means if one person clicks on the funnel three times, that counts as 3 interactions for either metric, as it should.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that you're choosing the total interactions here, not unique interactions. Which means if one person clicks on the funnel three times, that counts as three interactions for either metric, as it should.
```

At the same time, you don't want to discard second order effects. What if the horizontal funnel layout prevents users from switching to other graphs? This might increase funnel interactions (local metric #2 increases), but at a severe cost to the global metric (#1).

To solve this problem, we introduced secondary metrics. We encourage making the main metric as the local metric, and then allow the option of having a few secondary metrics. We don't do significance analysis on these secondary metrics, but show the metric values for each variant, so you can ensure that there's no huge drop in global metrics while deciding on results.

Another advantage of local metrics over global is that it can be hard to reliably move global metrics[^2], and thus local metrics allow you to see changes faster, since they're smaller scoped, and thus move quicker.

[^2]: Depends a lot on how big and mature your product is, and how many sub features it has. If there's only one thing the app does, the local metric is the global metric.

> ## Experiment results aren't set in stone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2. Experiment results aren't set in stone
```

> So, you just finished running the experiment above, and the results are in. Horizontal funnel layout had 1000 interactions, while vertical funnel layout had 1200. The results ended up being significant, with vertical funnel layout being 20% better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, you just finished running the experiment above, and the results are in. Horizontal funnel layout had 1,000 interactions, while vertical funnel layout had 1,200. The results ended up being significant, with vertical funnel layout being 20% better.
```

All well and good... except this goes against everything you know about using your own product. You find the vertical view congested, hard to parse, and sort of terrible.

Do you blindly trust the data, or your intuition?

> Both have issues. Your intuition might be how you see the world, but not necessarily how people who use the product see the world. At the same time, what if there was a bug in the vertical layout implementation, which counted each interaction twice? Thus, the real number could've been 600, instead of 1200, which massively changes your product direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both have issues. Your intuition might be how you see the world, but not necessarily how people who use the product see the world. At the same time, what if there was a bug in the vertical layout implementation, which counted each interaction twice? Thus, the real number could've been 600, instead of 1,200, which massively changes your product direction.
```

> I'd recommend neither blindly trusting the data, nor your intuition. Experiments show you what is happening, but can't answer why. The real institutional knowledge comes with answering the why, and building up  an accurate model of who your users are, what they need, and how they interact with your product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I'd recommend neither blindly trusting the data, nor your intuition. Experiments show you what is happening, but can't answer why. The real institutional knowledge comes with answering the why, and building up an accurate model of who your users are, what they need, and how they interact with your product.
```

> To answer the why, you need to talk through the causes. <a target='_blank' rel="noopener" href='https://neilkakkar.com/Bayes-Theorem-Framework-for-Critical-Thinking.html'> Create hypotheses about why this is happening</a> , watch user session recordings, and then make a call about what you want to do.

Reviewer: I see you Neil, plugging your own blog! 😆

That is, bring data to conversations, but also talk through causes.

> ## Changing environments can invalidate experiment results

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 3. Changing environments can invalidate experiment results
```

> So, you've finally gotten results for the experiment above, and figured out why they're like this. Turns out, the vertical layout promotes interaction as it allows users to see all steps of the funnel in one go, click on the steps that seem surprising, see the persons involved in that step, watch their recordings, etc. etc. While the horizontal is a bit more frustrating to see all this information at a glance, causing faster bounces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, you've finally gotten results for the experiment above, and figured out why they're like this. Turns out, the vertical layout promotes interaction – it allows users to see all steps of the funnel in one go, click on the steps that seem surprising, see the persons involved in that step, watch their recordings, etc. The horizontal layout, meanwhile, is a bit more frustrating to see all this information at a glance, causing faster bounces.
```

That's a model that keeps on giving, even when things change.

> Let's say its now three months in the future, and you've done a design revamp. Horizontal bars are thinner now, while vertical bars are thicker. As a result, horizontal funnels fit in cleanly on screen, while vertical funnels don't.[^4]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say it's now three months in the future, and you've done a design revamp. Horizontal bars are thinner now, while vertical bars are thicker. As a result, horizontal funnels fit in cleanly on screen, while vertical funnels don't.[^4]
```

You could run an experiment again to find if user preferences have changed, but if your model is right, interactions should start going down, and you can make the call to revert back to a horizontal layout.

[^4]: A bit contrived, but easier to keep this blogpost manageable without explaining the ins and outs of PostHog graphs :). Also, don't tell our designer, they'll scream if they hear of this design revamp.

All this is trying to say is experiment results don't stand the test of time, and reiterates the importance of extracting a useful model out of your experiment results.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Bonus: Experimentation for web products is very different from clinical trials

Another interesting thing we learned is that we can't simply run experiments for web products like we do a clinical trial. Rigor is important, but if it takes you a year to make up your mind about a vertical vs horizontal layout, you'll be in trouble.

This kind of rigor makes sense when you're developing a new drug: there's lives at stake, and mistakes do result in casualties. Thankfully, human biology is reliably consistent, so it's not like dopamine will start causing convulsions any time soon.

By contrast, web products are much lower stakes, and are present in an ever changing environment. Culture and individual preferences can change rapidly, and the cost of getting experiments wrong isn't too high, you can easily revert them later on.

Thus, moving quickly trumps rigor in web product experiments.

> We built experiments with this in mind. It's a web product, built for products that move quickly. That's all for this post, we'd love to have you try Experiments out, and tell us what you learn :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We built Experimentation with this in mind. It's a web product, built for products that move quickly. That's all for this post, we'd love to have you try Experiments out, and tell us what you learn. To do so, feel free to open an issue in [our Github repo](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog), give us a shout in our [PostHog community Slack channel](/slack), or join us directly for a [call](https://calendly.com/posthog-feedback) with our Product & Engineering team.
```
